---
layout: page
title: Artist Statement
permalink: /artist-statement/
---
Spurred through personal experiences of violence, the recurrent subject of my praxes has been to investigate the modalities and operations through which violence, conflict, and trauma become normalised as quotidien agents, and to concentrate on the archive as potential sites and *knowledge systems*, as a means of resistance to challenge and destabilise institutionalised systems of power and social structures that direct life. Through drawings, paintings, new media works, net-based projects, poems, essays, theoretical texts, and performances – both of bodies and networks, I seek to create the conditions for making visible and ‘unsilencing’ forms of everyday violence, and to blur the lines between documentation and participation, community and collectivity.

My ongoing doctoral research, titled ‘*Practicing Online Performativity: Constructing Politically Conscious Archives for the Future*’, explores the performative relations of affect between online archives and its users. By establishing this relationship of online performativity in the creation of archives, as a defining cybernetic feature of contemporary social culture, my practice seeks to utilise archiving as a resource for action, and ensure a more aware future.

Violence and its perception are an unstable and contestable phenomenon shaped by social and material factors – a fundamental condition ‘lodged in the core of human experience.’  It is simultaneously private, public, self-intimating and collective. Although trauma manifests as a physical, emotional and psychological bodily sensation, its measurability, locus and description remain ambivalent. As an intangible concept, trauma is thus difficult to define, as it ‘has no referential content,’ and resists objectification in language. Since the experience and interpretation of pain is highly subjective, its representation translates invariably between individuals, societies and cultures. Its depiction or its narration then, has the *potential* to serve many symbolic and metonymic functions, as a document, a record, a vision, a fact, a possibility, which can be judged, critiqued and understood within the context of its presentation. Though my work, I attempt to understand how the narrative experience of Violence, Trauma and Pain are embodied, embedded and extended in the contexts of these meanings and find ways to confront the potency of a (post) conflict space down to its basic vocabulary out of the need to ensure narratives are not erased or rendered invisible.