---
layout: layouts/page.njk
title: Long Biography
permalink: /long-bio/
---
Since 2016, I’ve been an active voice as an artist, writer, activist in the contemporary art and cultural spaces of Helsinki. Currently, I’m a Doctoral candidate at Aalto University, Helsinki, where I research ‘online performativity’ as a relationship between archives and its Users. I’m co-founder and Artistic Director (2018-2020) of ‘Museum of Impossible Forms’, Helsinki, an anti-racist, queer feminist cultural-center where I curate events, oversee programming, and provide support for multiple events.

My artistic practice of archive-making is immersive and participatory, based on community-building, and always seeks to create conditions of collaboration.

> In 2021, I will participate in a group exhibition at Vantaan TaideMuseo ARTSI, curated by Christine Langinauer(February-May); Mänttä Art Festival, ‘To err is Human’ curated by Anna Ruth (May-August); conduct performances at ‘Madhouse Helsinki’ (June-July). I will continue working on ‘Central Park Archives’ as an artist-consultant with m-cult ry, begin development work on Kiila Archives with Kiila ry, and am invited as consultant and speaker at the Ateneum Museum. I will co-curate (w/ Marianne Savallampi) an exhibition at Titanik Gallery, Turku.
>
> In 2020, I had a solo exhibition ‘Is there a room with just a colour?’ at Myymälä2, Helsinki in April-May; was an artist-in-residence at ‘Maunula Commons’ hosted by m-cult ry (August-September), where I developed a community-oriented co-archival project ‘Central Park Archives’; participated in ‘Meadow’ ONOMA Summer Exhibition 2020, curated by Taru Elfving, Fiskars Village; and 'Tapestry of Time', TAO Art Gallery (IN).  I was invited to be Associate Curator at HIAP Summer Residency, 2020, and as a speaker for several events at Aalto University and the University of Helsinki. I’ve contributed texts to ‘The Future of Museums’, Ed. Nora Sternfeld (University of Kassel, DE); ‘Margins to Museums’, Ed. Anna Rastas (Tampere University, FI); ‘Different Shapes of Racism’ Ed. Suvi Keskinen (CEREN, Helsinki University, FI), and ‘Six Years in the Third Space’, Third Space, Helsinki. I began my second year as a doctoral candidate at Aalto University, in September; and will have produced 56 events and completed my two-year term as Artistic Director at Museum of Impossible Forms, Helsinki.
>
> In 2019, I produced 103 events as Artistic Director of Museum of Impossible Forms; worked as Artistic Producer at m-cult ry to facilitate the residency & exhibition ‘Network Effects’, held in Oodi. With artist Vidha Saumya, I co-founded 'Outsiders at Work': an online publishing archive, and performed ‘direct control-feedback’ at Pixelache Festival 2019. I performed my ongoing work ‘Narrating WAR’ at Myymälä2, and became a board member of leftist writers’ group Killa ry. I presented talks ‘Resistance & Re-imagining Alternatives’, Nordic Decolonial Workshop, Helsinki University; and ‘Notes on Radical Diversity’, HAM, Helsinki.
>
> In 2018, I was an artist-in-residence at TIFA Working Studios, Pune, where I conceived and exhibited projects based on the curatorial theme ‘To Participate in the Archive’. I  presented my thesis ‘Cyber Archive: Being and Doing Knowledge’ focusing on archiving as artistic practice studied through lenses of cybernetics, media studies, & critical theory; graduated with an MA in Visual Cultures, Curating, & Contemporary Art from Aalto University; and performed ‘Narrating War’, at Experimental Event VI, in Pori; Carincarina, in Nova Gorica; Museum of Impossible Forms, in Helsinki. I was a guest-lecturer at 'Archiving: Histories of the Present' at Aalto University; presented artist talks ‘Re-Musing the Museum, pt. II’ at Kiasma Museum of Contemporary Art, Helsinki; ‘Cyber Archives’, at the University of Vienna. I published essays in 'Hākārā Journal' (IN), AROOP Journal (IN), and in RABRAB Journal for Political & Formal Inquiries in Art (FI), amongst others.
>
> I co-initiated ‘Thursday Night Dinners’, a weekly food project in the ViCCA building from 2016-2018. This led to my participation in 'Ateria/The Meal', a 3-day event at URB 2017, Kiasma Contemporary Art Museum. Culminating this, I co-designed & edited the journal ‘FOOD and Other Practices in the Arthouse’, published by Aalto University. I was a part of ‘OUT 2’, a 26-hour film exhibited at ‘Research Pavilion: The Utopia of Access’, Venice Biennale, 2017; and held a multi-venue solo exhibition 'Limitation of Liability', in Mumbai Assembly, Piramal Museum, and Harkat Studios, Mumbai.In 2016, I became a member of Third Space, Helsinki; held a solo exhibition, ‘256 million Colours of Violence’; participated in exhibitions such as ‘Where Does Poetry Nest?’, Galleria Emil, Tampere; ‘Space Invaders IV: Heterotopia’, Espoo; and produced my first curated exhibition ‘SOAK’, conducted on the boat ‘Illusia’ as a way to explore alternate exhibiting spaces in Helsinki. As a student, I was instrumental in creating the Art student association ‘ViMMA ry’, which continues student advocacy at Aalto University to this day.
